Hello and welcome back to the course on deep learning I hope you enjoyed the introduction into our Anand's
and today right away off the bat.
We're going to jump into a huge problem that exists with our own ends.
All right so what is this problem called the vanishing gradient.
It is first discovered by Sep hoc writer and I hope I'm pronouncing that right.
I know we have students from Germany so you can comment if the pronunciation is incorrect but e he said
Sep or Joeseph is his full name is a genius scientist who back in the 90s while he was still not a professor
is a recent photo so he was much younger when he actually came up with this concept.
He found that there was a big big problem.
And we'll talk about the the problem solved just now I just wanted to point out who are the people that
spotted this and basically as you'll learn from the further Charles SAP is one of the founding people
in the modern way that we use our own ends and LACMA and we'll talk about that further down.
But this is hip hop right.
So I just wanted to make sure you know who is behind all this.
And the second person is Yoshio banjo.
He's a professor at the University of Montreal.
He also discovered that there's this problem.
I think a bit later in 1994 so CEP was discovered in 1991.
Yoshio wrote about this in 1994.
But again this is another person driving this whole trip pushing the envelope in the space of our own
ends.
And if you go to the University of Monteriano you look up Yoshio your show's profile you will find that
Russia has over five hundred research papers.
And by the way there is Yoshio banjo just hanging out with young Licken as you can see they all know
each other it's a very tight knit community and it does sound like a conspiracy.
These people that are driving are pushing the envelope in terms of deep learning.
These are just like a select group of people who are all all in it together they all know what's going
on there.
Been doing it since the 80s or 90s and now it's all popping out into the world.
So there you go that's just to give you a quick idea of who's behind all this and today.
And now we're proceeding to the vanishing problem itself.
So as you remember this is a gradient descent algorithm we're trying to find the log of the global minimum
of your cost function and that's going to be the optimal solution optimal set up for your neural network.
As you also recall your gradient or your information travels through your neural network to your answer
to get your outputs and then the error is calculated and is propagated back to the network to update
the weights.
And here we've got some way to find out.
So what happens in a recurrent neural network is a similar thing.
But here you've got a bit more going on right.
So when your information trials through the network it travels like that.
You've got lots of travels through time and information from previous timepoint goes keeps coming through
the network and remember that every note here it's always very important to remember for neural networks
that every single node here is not just a node it's a representation of a whole layer of knowledge.
Remember we're looking at from like from the top or from the bottom.
They are they actually extend through this chart down there into into this presentation you can see
that there's lots more neurons behind the ones that we can't actually see because each one represents
Alair very important to remember that.
And so at each point in time you can calculate your cost function or your error.
So basically your cost function compares your output which is in the right circle to your desired output
to what you should be getting.
And this happens during the training.
And so and you have these values for throughout the time series.
So for every single one of these red circles you can calculate the cost function and let's focus on
one.
Just to understand what's going on let's focus on this one specifically at time t.
So you've calculated the cost function Epsilon team and now you want to propagate your cost function
back through the network.
How is this going to look because you need to update the weight.
So every single neuron which participated in the calculation of the output associated with the cost
function should be should have their weight updated to in order to help it better calculate the output
to minimize that error.
And the thing here is that it's not just the neurons in directly below excellente directly below this
red circle it's all the neurons that contributed.
And there's many more of them.
There's all of these neurons as far back as you go depending on how many times steps you take you might
take one and take two I take 50 ton steps depending on how you set up your network.
And this is where the problem lies that you have to update or you have to propagate all the way back
through time to these neurons.
And we talk when we talk about time it's not that the problem is that we can travel through time not
at all that we've unraveled this network.
So this whole propagation can be facilitated.
The problem lies in something else and as much I don't like putting math on the slide on intuition slides
we're not going to go through the math but I'll point out one thing here.
So this is the math behind our hands and we'll definitely direct you to more additional reading which
you can do to upskilling on all of these math.
So here we've got w rec and W stands for weight and recurring and that is the weight that is used to
connect the hidden Lares to themselves in the unrolled temporal loop and as you can see here on the
left you're in order to get from XTi my history from this layer remember this is a letter to you sister
to you need to apply double check.
Then from here to here appliable.
Right.
And in simple terms into intuitive terms what you're doing is you're simply multiplying the value here
as you remember to get from one lairds index we multiply the output by the way.
And then we get to the next line and then multiply the output by the way and get to the X and then we
modify the output from here.
By the way get here.
And the thing here is that we're multiplying with the same exact ways multiple times many times as many
times as we need to go through this temporal loop.
And this can be set this you can set this in your network do you want to do it once you want to look
back one step you'll look back three steps you'll look back 50 steps.
But as many times as we do it we have to multiply by the weight.
And this is where the problem arises because when you multiply by something small your value decreases
very quickly and this multiplication comes from this p here you can see that pea's says for multiplication
so we have to multiply.
And that's what is representing that as far as you go back you multiply.
And as you remember weights are assigned at the start of your neural network as you see in the practical
tutorials.
Your weights are assigned as a random value but run of those clusters or and from there.
The network trains them up and identifies what they should be.
But if you start with random double random double close to zero then because you're multiplying but
many times the more you multiply the lower the value gets so if you start off you might have a certain
gradient going through your network being back propagate through your network.
Then you move backwards your gradient becomes less then your gradient becomes less and then your brain
becomes even less.
And what does that mean for the network.
This is the important part too.
Kind of like get your head around that.
What does a vanishing gradient like that why is it bad for the network.
Well because the gradient as it goes back through the network it is used to update the way.
And we know that already well the lower the gradient is the harder it is for the network to update the
way.
It cannot.
It can sylke understand what kind of contribution each of these outputs has towards the error and therefore
we can update the weights.
But the lower the gradient the slower it's going to update the weights and the higher the gradient the
fosters going to update the weights and get to the final result.
And so therefore if you have like for instance a thousand pocks these weights for for this layer might
be updated towards the end of the thousand and they'll have some final results but these weights because
the greens are so much smaller they're going to be up there it's slower and therefore by the end of
the thousand epochs you might not have the final results there and therefore this part of the network
trained this part of network is not trained based on this cause function.
But the problem here is not just that half your network is not trained properly but also that these
way these weights are this layer it's outputs are being used as inputs for further Lares.
So the training here has been happening all along.
Based on vore based off of inputs that are coming from untrained neurons untrained Lerer So it's kind
of like a vicious cycle.
You're you're training here and you think you're getting good results but because you're gradient so
small here this is training so slow and outputs is giving is so are are incorrect are not final outputs
and therefore your training on the non-final outputs so because of this disbalance because of vanishing
grading you have a a problem in your network which is not just that these weights are not being trained
properly the whole network has not been trained properly because these weights are not being trained
properly.
And and that's there's like a domino effect like this wherever you look in the network always the ones
at the very back are going to have that problem.
And this is in a nutshell what the vanishing gradient problem for recurrent neural networks is.
And that's kind of the main roadblock to using recurrent neural networks.
And let's summarize this in a in a short slide so double Jurek is small then your you have a vanishing
grade problem if W is large you have an exploding Green problem because same thing.
But then it's just going to explode.
And here's an important thing to point out here is that of course there's more to it right.
There's as you can see there's this formula.
There's other things like the activation functions and so on.
So it's not as simple as small or large or less than one greater than one.
But as a rule of thumb if you have very small weights you've got to have a vaccine ready and if you
have very large weights we put 100 in there the value of 100 and you're going to buy by you're going
to have 10000 by step three you're going to have a million.
So then you have an exploding graded problem.
So hopefully this summarizes xponent grain problem on an intuitive level because.
So in short because you're unraveling the temporal loop the further you go through your network the
lower your gradient is and the harder it is to train the ways which has a domino effect on all of the
further weights throughout the network as well.
And so how do you combat vanishing brain problem.
There's a couple of solutions.
For instance for the exploding gradient you can have truncated Bracq back propagation so you stop back
propagating after a certain point but as you can imagine that's that's probably not optimal because
then you're not updating all the weights but if you don't stop then you're just going to have a completely
irrelevant network so it's better than the original approach.
Then you can have penalties so you could have the gradient being penalize and Beanery is artificially
reduced.
You can have gradient clipping so you could have like a maximum limit for the gradient you could say
never never have the gradient go over this value.
And then if it's over that value just stays at that value as it propagates further down through the
network.
You can have the Vanish Ingredion problem you have a CRN other solutions you have weight initialization
where you are smart about how you initialize your weights to minimize the potential for vanishing gradient.
You can have there's a type of network called the Echo state networks and we're not going to talk about
that but they do somehow solve that or they are designed to solve the vanishing problem.
But there's also a different type of network called The Long short term memory networks or the LACMA
for short which are extremely popular which are considered to be the go to network for implementing
recurrent neural networks and that's exactly what we're going to be talking about in the rest of this
section.
So that's going to be very exciting.
We're going to look at a brand new architecture for recurrent neural networks really Conway to get started
on that it's a very interesting topic to get into.
But for now this is this brings us to the end of the vanishing gray problem Tauriel and some additional
reading.
So additional reading you can definitely reference the original works by self harm writer and social
change.
So this is Cephus paper in 1991 from 1991.
It's completely in German so I'm not even going to read the name but if you understand and can read
German then definitely this could be a good read for you.
Then there's Yoshua banjo's paper which is called Learn learning long term dependency of green dissent
is difficult 1994.
Also you can reference that but what I would recommend looking into is a paper called on the difficulty
of training a recurrent neural networks by Razvan Pascal.
No it's just newer it's 2013 and it's also got a banjo as the co-author.
So probably you're supervising some of this research.
And here it summarizes a lot of things that Yoshio banjo talks about in his paper from 1994.
So why not look at something you or I would recommend checking this paper out.
So there we go.
That's the vanishing Green problem.
Hope this was fun.
Can wait to see on the next tutorial and until then enjoy deep learning.